---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogPostLayout.astro
title: Lessons from the Wizard's bag, Lesson 1
date: 2024-02-04
author: Jason
image:
  src: /images/blog_images/2024/post-0002.png
  alt: Placeholder Image
description: 
draft: false
category: TTPs
---

In the early stages of crafting the Wizard's Bag, a software project that has already unveiled myriad lessons, one aspect of programming development stands out as particularly significant: Naming Conventions. This seemingly mundane yet foundational element of coding often emerges as a formidable challenge, akin to the incantations and nuances of spellcasting in the wizarding world.  For example, should we write `leviosa`,  `LeviOsa`, `leviOsa`, `levi-osa`, `levi_osa`?!


Before delving deeper into this subject, it's essential to underscore that the insights shared here are imbued with personal opinions shaped by practical experiences. While acknowledging the existence of numerous authoritative voices on this topic, I opt to offer insights gleaned from my own journey, hoping they may resonate with fellow programmers grappling with this perennial dilemma.

At its core, a naming convention within the programming realm dictates the rules governing the construction of character sequences used to identify variables, types, functions, and other elements within code and documentation (see <a href="https://www.google.com/search?client=safari&rls=en&q=what+is+naming+convention+within+the+context+of+programming&ie=UTF-8&oe=UTF-8" target="_blank">Wikipedia</a>, cause we're not in school anymore folks). While the definition offered by Wikipedia works, I think its important to elevate the discourse to encompass the communal aspect inherent in the establishment of such conventions.

Indeed, naming conventions transcend mere syntactical choices like Camel Case, Snake Case, or Kebab Case (see <a href="https://www.pluralsight.com/blog/software-development/programming-naming-conventions-explained" target="_blank"> Programming naming conventions</a> for a fun list of more cases). They embody a tacit agreement within the programming community, serving as a <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lingua_franca#:~:text=The%20term%20lingua%20franca%20derives,notably%20during%20the%20Renaissance%20era" target="_blank">lingua franca</a> that facilitates effective communication, reduces cognitive load, and fosters coherence across projects. Consequently, it behooves us, as a collective, to articulate the rationale behind our chosen conventions, thereby enriching the programming discourse and fostering a culture of clarity and consistency.

For instance, within the confines of my projects, I adhere to a meticulously curated set of conventions tailored to each programming language. In Java and JavaScript, I use Camel Case, whereas Python and SQL scripts are done in Snake Case. This deliberate compartmentalization serves a dual purpose: it streamlines the coding process by aligning syntax with mental models while mitigating the cognitive dissonance inherent in transitioning between disparate programming paradigms.

Moreover, beyond dictating the choice of case, a robust naming convention extends its purview to encompass organizational principles, thereby promoting codebase hygiene and fortifying its resilience to entropy. Consider, for instance, the challenge posed by attribute clashes within classes—an oft-overlooked yet pernicious nuisance that can proliferate chaos within the codebase.

During my forays into the Java segment of the Wizard's Bag project, I encountered a predicament emblematic of this issue. A class christened `rpgClass` (due to the constraint imposed by the reserved keyword "class") boasted attributes like `name`, `subclassName`, and `description`. While seemingly innocuous at first glance, this seemingly innocuous nomenclature precipitated a conundrum when confronted with classes sharing overlapping attributes.

To preempt such conundrums, I advocate for a principled approach to attribute naming that eschews ambiguity and fosters clarity. By prefixing attributes with class-specific identifiers—`className`, `classSubclassName`, and `classDescription`—we obviate the need for mental acrobatics when deciphering the intended semantics. This seemingly pedantic endeavor pays dividends in scenarios involving database integration, where adherence to a standardized naming convention bridges the semantic chasm between code and data models.

One might rightly question the necessity of such meticulousness, particularly in light of the redundancy engendered by verbose attribute names. After all, invoking an attribute via its object reference—e.g., `rpgClass.getName()`—renders the inclusion of the class identifier seemingly superfluous, if not outright wasteful.

Yet, the true value of this convention manifests in scenarios where disparate realms converge—such as interfacing with SQL databases. In the realm of Postgres, where tables serve as the repository for class data, adherence to a consistent naming convention—`class_name`, `class_subclass_name`, `class_description`—fosters a seamless transition between code and data layers. This symbiotic relationship between naming conventions obviates the cognitive overhead associated with mental context-switching, thereby enhancing developer productivity and codebase maintainability.

In conclusion, the efficacy of a naming convention transcends its syntactical trappings, serving as a linchpin that binds disparate elements of the programming ecosystem into a cohesive whole. By embracing a principled approach to naming, grounded in clarity, consistency, and contextually, programmers can navigate the labyrinthine intricacies of software development with confidence and clarity. As custodians of this venerable tradition, let us pledge to uphold its sanctity and propagate its virtues, ensuring that future generations of programmers inherit a legacy steeped in clarity, coherence, and camaraderie.
