---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogPostLayout.astro
title: Building an Astro Blog; My thoughts
date: 2024-01-28
author: Jason Cameron
image:
  src: /images/post-0001.png
  alt: Rocket ship flying in a see of stars
description:
draft: false
category: Astro
---

## About
This blog was constructed using Astro with guidance from the [Astro Blog Course](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6XzyobQYQVQ&t=4555s) by Coding in Public. As of this writing, the course is a year old instructional guide that provides comprehensive steps for setting up a blog. The instructor's explanations were thorough and commendable. While navigating through the process, I encountered a few instances where either changes had occurred in Astro's code since the tutorial's recording or certain functionalities didn't align with my setup. In this post, I aim to discuss my rationale behind choosing Astro and elucidate the lessons I learned along the journey.

## The Quick Why for Using Astro
For quite some time, I've harbored the desire to create a blog. However, I was adamant about not hosting my content on third-party platforms like Medium or LinkedIn. Preserving ownership of my work was paramount. Additionally, I sought a seamless writing, editing, and posting experience. Enter Astro, which offers a clean and familiar markdown (MD) editor. This allows for effortless integration of headers, sub-headers, tables, and code snippets – a programmer's dream.

Moreover, ease of web deployment was non-negotiable. Any hindrance in the creation-to-production pipeline would impede productivity. With my blog residing in a GitHub (GH) repository connected to Netlify hosting, updating the site is as simple as pushing posts to GH, with automatic updates on the web. The code governing post management selects the most recent blog and displays it on the main page, with pagination to ensure a seamless browsing experience. It's simplicity at its finest, although as programmers, we know that change is inevitable.

## Lessons Learned
While there's much more to discuss regarding why Astro was my chosen platform (including comparisons with other options, perhaps in a future blog 😁), I'd like to delve into the insights gained during this journey, focusing on recent developments that might differ from the <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6XzyobQYQVQ&t=4555s" target="_blank">tutorial</a>.

### First
Over the past year, there have been some changes in Astro's functionality. Initially, I encountered issues with Astro recognizing my blog posts within the designated directory. The tutorial had set up posts within a specific "blog" directory structure, whereas Astro's documentation, <a href="https://docs.astro.build/en/tutorial/0-introduction/" target="_blank">"Build your first Astro Blog"</a>, suggested an alternate approach. Adhering to Astro's guidelines resolved the issue, albeit with some initial frustration. It's worth noting that while I couldn't find explicit <a href="https://docs.astro.build/en/core-concepts/routing/#_top" target="_blank">documentation</a> mandating the directory structure change, following Astro's instructions proved effective.

### Second
Astro's handling of images has also evolved. While the tutorial utilized a specific import command for the image component, recent updates recommend a different approach. Adapting to these changes ensures compatibility with the latest version of Astro and enhances the efficiency of image management on the site. I recommend reviewing their <a href="https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/images/#_top" target="_blank">documentation referencing how Astro now handles images</a>.

``` 
-- Old import
import { Image } from "@astrojs/image/components

-- New import
import { Image } from 'astro:assets';
```

### Third
Although the tutorial referenced an icon integration component,  <a href="https://github.com/natemoo-re/astro-icon#readme" target="_blank">astro-icon</a>, my experience with it was less than optimal. Whether due to changes in functionality or my own missteps, I couldn't successfully implement it. However, given its widespread usage and potential benefits, further exploration or community support might yield better results. Alternatively, leveraging tools like Tailwind for icon integration remains a viable option.

## Conclusion
In conclusion, embarking on this journey with Astro has been both educational and rewarding. While navigating through changes and challenges, the versatility and efficiency of the platform have remained evident, underscoring its suitability for aspiring bloggers and developers alike.

## Quick Summary
In this blog post, I discuss my experience building a blog using Astro with guidance from the Coding in Public Astro Blog Course. Highlighting the reasons behind my choice of Astro and the lessons learned along the way, I emphasize the importance of owning one's content and the need for a seamless writing and deployment process. The post covers recent updates and changes in Astro's functionality, addressing issues encountered during the setup process. Through careful adaptation and exploration of alternatives, I provide insights into optimizing the blogging experience with Astro. Overall, the journey with Astro proves both educational and rewarding, affirming its suitability for aspiring bloggers and developers seeking efficiency and versatility in their content management endeavors.